---
layout: post
title: How to double-click to open IPython Notebooks on Linux
description: Last year, I was introduced to the pleasure of IPython Notebooks.  The main reason I enjoy coding on them is how easy and immediate is going from the code to the results. However, I found having to launch a terminal, `cd` to the directory I need, and type `ipython notebook` every time quite annoying. After a bit of research, I came up with a way to directly double-click on a notebook to launch it in your default browser.
imgurl: /logo.png
categories:
- blog
---

Last year, I was introduced to the pleasure of [IPython Notebooks](http://http://jupyter.org/).  The main reason I enjoy coding on them is how easy and immediate is going from the code to the results. However, I found having to launch a terminal, `cd` to the directory I need, and type `ipython notebook` every time quite annoying. After a bit of research, I came up with a way to directly double-click on a notebook to launch it in your default browser.

This is an ugly hack, as it leaves a notebook server always running, and uses it to open all notebooks you double-click on, but it's really handy if you have lots of notebooks scattered all over your filesystem. I wrote a bash script that checks if this server is running, starts it if that's not the case, and redirects your browser to the appropriate location:

{% highlight bash %}
#!/bin/bash
netstat -tln |grep "8902"
if [ $? -eq 1 ]
then
jupyter notebook / --no-browser --port=8902 &
sleep 1
fi
xdg-open "http://localhost:8902/notebooks$1"
{% endhighlight %}

The port number, 8902, was my arbitrary choice: Jupyter usually uses ports in the 8800s and 8900s. Also notice that `jupyter notebook` requires the most recent version of IPython, and (at least on my machine) opens a Python 3 server by default. You should customise the script according to your preferences.

Now we have to:

- Place the script somewhere accessible,
- Create a new MIME type for .ipynb files
- Set our script as the default application to open the files of that MIME type.

I've written a bash script that does all that and can be found [here](/files/jupyter-launcher-setup.sh). Just download it and run it once: magically, you'll be able to click .ipynb files from now on. This was tested on Ubuntu and Scientific Linux.
